---
title: useWS
description: The all-in-one composable to manage reactive WebSocket connections from client-side.
navigation.icon: i-lucide-smartphone-nfc
---

The `useWS` will be the main composable to manage WebSocket connections client-side. It automatically manage the states of the subscribed topics and the connection itself.

Used in conjunction with [`defineWSHandler`](/usage/definewshandler) and [runtime configuration](/getting-started/configuration), it will provide a seamless experience for real-time communication as simple as doing `const { states, send } = useWS()`.

## Arguments

It only accepts two arguments, both of them optional.

### `topics`

An array of strings representing the topics to subscribe to. These should not include those defined in your runtime configuration.

```ts
const { states, send } = useWS(['session', 'info'])
```

### `options`

An optional object to override the default options for the WebSocket connection.

::field-group
  ::field{name="route" type="string"}
    Defines the default route for `useWS` to connect to the WebSocket server. - Default to runtime configuration
  ::

  ::field{name="heartbeat" type="boolean | object"}
    Enables or disables the heartbeat mechanism. If an object is provided, it is possible to define the interval and the message to send. - Default to `false`
  ::

  ::field{name="autoReconnect" type="boolean | object"}
    Enables or disables the auto-reconnect mechanism. If an object is provided, it is possible to define the interval and the maximum number of attempts. - Default to `false`
  ::

  ::field{name="immediate" type="boolean"}
    The connection will be established immediately. - Default to `true`
  ::

  ::field{name="autoConnect" type="boolean"}
    Automatically connect to the websocket when `route` changes. - Default to `true`
  ::

  ::field{name="autoClose" type="boolean"}
    Automatically close the websocket when the component is unmounted. - Default to `true`
  ::

  ::field{name="protocols" type="string[]"}
    An array of strings representing the sub-protocols to use. - Default to `[]`
  ::
::

## Returns

It returns a number of properties and methods to manage the WebSocket connection and the subscribed topics.

### `states`

A reactive object containing the states of all the subscribed topics.

```ts
const { states, send } = useWS<{
  session: {
    users: number
  }
}>(['session'])

console.log(states.session.users)
```

### `send`

A function to send messages to the WebSocket server. It can accept multiple arguments, based on use-case, but always returns a boolean indicating if the message was sent successfully.

- `send(payload: string | ArrayBuffer | Blob): boolean`
- `send(type: 'subscribe' | 'unsubscribe', topic: string): boolean`
- `send(type: 'publish', topic: string, payload: any): boolean`

The last two methods will always be transformed to string before being sent to the server.

```ts
const { states, send } = useWS<{
  chat: {
    user?: string,
    text: string,
  }[]
}>(['chat'])

const file = new Blob(['Hello, World!'], { type: 'text/plain' })
send(file)

send('publish', 'chat', { text: 'Hello, World!' })
```

::note
Sending a `payload` directly without specifying the type and topic will send them as is and will not be automatically handled server-side.

By contrast, specifying the type and topic will be handled automatically by the server if [`defineWSHandler`](/usage/definewshandler) is used and the target is not an internal topic.
::

### `data`

A ref containing any extra data received from the server and not handled by `states` automatically.

```ts
const { data } = useWS()

// server sends 'Hello, World!' directly without publishing to a topic

console.log(data.value) // 'Hello, World!'
```

### `status`

A ref containing the current status of the WebSocket connection.

```ts
const { status } = useWS()

console.log(status.value) // 'OPEN' | 'CONNECTING' | 'CLOSED'
```

### `open`/`close`

Methods to manually open and close the WebSocket connection.

### Internals

The following properties and methods are considered internal and should not be used directly. I decided to expose them for debugging purposes or advanced use-cases.

- `ws`: The WebSocket instance.
- `_data`: It contains any raw data received from the server.
- `_send`: It is used under the hood to send messages to the server.

## Type Support

As you might have noticed in the examples above, `useWS` accepts a type parameter. This is to provide type support for the states object.
